---
layout: post
title: "Notes on Multiplicative Groups and Order: Fermat's Theorem on Primes and Wilson's Theorem"
date: 2025-02-05
tags: [Mathematics, Algebra]
lang: en
---

### Remarks

| **Multiplicative Group**                | **Additive Group**                     |
| --------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| 1 is the identity element               | 0 is the identity element              |
| When the order of $x$ is $r$, $x^r = 1$ | When the order of $x$ is $r$, $rx = 0$ |

- For a prime $p$, if information about $p - 1$ is given, consider the multiplicative group $(\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z})^\times$ of order $p - 1$.
- The multiplicative group of a finite field is cyclic.
- For a _cyclic_ multiplicative group $G$, $nm \mid \|G\|$ is equivalent to the existence of an element $x$ such that $x^{nm} = 1$ but $x^n, x^m \neq 1$.
- Order is different from period. In general, **(period) = (order) + 1**.

### Fermat's Theorem on Primes

> **Theorem.** A prime $p$ can be expressed in the form $p = a^2 + b^2$ for two integers $a, b$ if and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod{4}$.

**Proof.**

(⇒) Trivial.

(⇐) Let $G = (\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z})^\times$. By the condition, $4 \mid \|G\|$. Therefore, there exists an element $n$ such that $n^4 = 1$ but $n^2 \neq 1$. That is, $n^2 = -1$. Hence, $p \mid n^2 + 1$. Now, considering in $\mathbb{Z}[i]$, we have $p \mid (n + i)(n - i)$. If $p$ were irreducible in $\mathbb{Z}[i]$, then $p \mid n + i$ or $p \mid n - i$ (note that the fact that $\mathbb{Z}[i]$ is UFD is used here) but both are impossible. Therefore, $p$ is not irreducible, and by conjugacy,

$$
p = (a + bi)(a - bi) = a^2 + b^2
$$

■

### Wilson's Theorem

> **Theorem.** $p$ is prime if and only if $(p - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{p}$.

**Proof.**

(⇒) Let $G = (\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z})^\times$. The product of all elements of $G$ is $(p - 1)!$. Except for $\pm 1$, which are the roots of $x^2 = 1$, all other elements of $G$ do not have themselves as their inverse. Therefore, $(p - 1)! \equiv -1$.

(⇐) Let $N = (p - 1)! + 1$. By the condition, $p \mid N$. If $p$ were not prime, then for some prime $q < p$, we would have $q \mid N$. However, $N \equiv 1 \pmod{q}$, which is a contradiction. ■
